Global estimates of the storage and transit time of water through vegetation,Andrew J. Felton; Joshua B. Fisher; Koen Hufkens; Adam J. Purdy; Seth A. Spawn-Lee; Lou F. Duloisy; Gregory R. Goldsmith,https://www.nature.com/articles/s44221-024-00365-9,The time it takes for water to transit from the ground back to the atmosphere affects weather, climate, biogeochemistry and ecosystem function. The transit time of water through vegetation, defined as the age of water transpiring from vegetation since time of entry, is a particularly understudied aspect of the terrestrial hydrologic cycle. Here we use a synergy of satellite remote sensing measurements over a five-year period to estimate global aboveground vegetation water storage to be on average 484 km<sup>3</sup>, roughly half of which is stored in Earth’s water-limited savannah, grassland and shrubland ecosystems. We then combine these storage estimates with remotely sensed data for transpiration and find that mean transit times of water through aboveground vegetation vary from ~5 days in croplands to ~18 days in evergreen needleleaf forests, with a global median of 8.1 days. In herbaceous-dominated land-cover types with comparatively low water storage and high seasonal water use, such as grasslands, the water stored in biomass may be frequently transiting in less than one day. Our estimates contribute to resolving the role of vegetation in the terrestrial hydrologic cycle; plants store little water compared to other pools, and the time it takes to return that water to the atmosphere is among the fastest components of the hydrologic cycle.
Overlooked discrepancies in protocols undermine coastal restoration practices in China,Tian Xie; Zhonghua Ning; Baoshan Cui; Qiang He; Cong Chen; Zhenchang Zhu; Yujia Zhai; Guogui Chen; Qing Wang; Shanze Li; Junhong Bai; Christopher B. Craft; Tjeerd J. Bouma; Zhifeng Yang,https://www.nature.com/articles/s43247-025-01995-x,To improve the success of expanding ecosystem restoration efforts, technical guiding-standards are being developed in many nations. Whether these protocols have been well adopted to guide restoration practices remains unknown, especially in developing countries where policies evolve rapidly to balance socioeconomic development with ecosystem restoration. By conducting text semantic mining analyses, we reveal widespread discrepancies between China’s coastal restoration practices and protocols over the past four decades. Over 60% of executed restoration projects had no detailed technical standards to guide implementation, especially for severely degraded ecosystems. Development of these standards lagged significantly behind project implementation, was poorly enforced, and focused more on monitoring than guiding good restoration designs and adaptive management, likely undermining restoration performance. Nevertheless, current policies toward prioritizing ecosystem restoration offer opportunities to remedy this issue. Enforcing policies to ensure that practices are guided by protocols is necessary to promote coastal restoration success in China and globally as nations strive to achieve ambitious restoration targets.
Hydroclimate volatility on a warming Earth,Daniel L. Swain; Andreas F. Prein; John T. Abatzoglou; Christine M. Albano; Manuela Brunner; Noah S. Diffenbaugh; Deepti Singh; Christopher B. Skinner; Danielle Touma,https://www.nature.com/articles/s43017-024-00624-z,Hydroclimate volatility refers to sudden, large and/or frequent transitions between very dry and very wet conditions. In this Review, we examine how hydroclimate volatility is anticipated to evolve with anthropogenic warming. Using a metric of ‘hydroclimate whiplash’ based on the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index, global-averaged subseasonal (3-month) and interannual (12-month) whiplash have increased by 31–66% and 8–31%, respectively, since the mid-twentieth century. Further increases are anticipated with ongoing warming, including subseasonal increases of 113% and interannual increases of 52% over land areas with 3 °C of warming; these changes are largest at high latitudes and from northern Africa eastward into South Asia. Extensive evidence links these increases primarily to thermodynamics, namely the rising water-vapour-holding capacity and potential evaporative demand of the atmosphere. Increases in hydroclimate volatility will amplify hazards associated with rapid swings between wet and dry states (including flash floods, wildfires, landslides and disease outbreaks), and could accelerate a water management shift towards co-management of drought and flood risks. A clearer understanding of plausible future trajectories of hydroclimate volatility requires expanded focus on the response of atmospheric circulation to regional and global forcings, as well as land–ocean–atmosphere feedbacks, using large ensemble climate model simulations, storm-resolving high-resolution models and emerging machine learning methods.
Decoupling of surface water storage from precipitation in global drylands due to anthropogenic activity,Gang Zhao; Huilin Gao; Yao Li; Qiuhong Tang; R. Iestyn Woolway; Julian Merder; Lorenzo Rosa; Anna M. Michalak,https://www.nature.com/articles/s44221-024-00367-7,The availability of surface water in global drylands is essential for both human society and ecosystems. However, the long-term drivers of change in surface water storage, particularly those related to anthropogenic activities, remain unclear. Here we use multi-mission remote sensing data to construct monthly time series of water storage changes from 1985 to 2020 for 105,400 lakes and reservoirs in global drylands. An increase of 2.20 km<sup>3</sup> per year in surface water storage is found primarily due to the construction of new reservoirs. For lakes and old reservoirs (constructed before 1983), conversely, the trend in storage is minor when aggregated globally, but they dominate surface water storage trends in 91% of individual global dryland basins. Further analysis reveals that long-term storage changes in these water bodies are primarily linked to anthropogenic factors—including human-induced warming and water-management practices—rather than to precipitation changes, as previously thought. These findings reveal a decoupling of surface water storage from precipitation in global drylands, raising concerns about societal and ecosystem sustainability.
A new look at Earth’s water and energy with SWOT,Nadya T. Vinogradova; Tamlin M. Pavelsky; J. Thomas Farrar; Faisal Hossain; Lee-Lueng Fu,https://www.nature.com/articles/s44221-024-00372-w,As the planet transitions to a new climate, adapting to the Earth’s changing water cycle remains among the top challenges faced by humanity. The relative stability of climate and water resources over the past millennia allowed humans to build complex societies with established agriculture, infrastructure and economies that today sustain the livelihood of eight billion people. As the planet warms, this steady state of water movement is being altered, and both oceanic and terrestrial components of the global water cycle are undergoing measurable changes that will probably continue. Predicting the new trajectory of Earth’s water in a warming climate begins with observing the entire water supply–demand chain across the planet, from Earth’s largest water reservoir, the ocean, to water storage, use and recycling on land. A recently launched space observatory, called the Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT), is making a timely entrance and addition to the water-observing networks, by providing direct, high-resolution measurements of the water height and volume of nearly all water on the Earth’s surface. Here we link technological advances in wide-swath satellite altimetry and SWOT’s novel measurements of water volume across the planet to scientific innovations for Earth’s water cycle, including studies of changes in the water storage and dynamics in global lakes and rivers, rising seas, ocean energetics and land–ocean exchange, with implications for practical information for water resource managers and climate resilience efforts. We also discuss how SWOT innovations set the stage for future missions and integrated Earth-system approaches within the water science community.
Episodic warm climates on early Mars primed by crustal hydration,Danica Adams; Markus Scheucher; Renyu Hu; Bethany L. Ehlmann; Trent B. Thomas; Robin Wordsworth; Eva Scheller; Rob Lillis; Kayla Smith; Heike Rauer; Yuk L. Yung,https://www.nature.com/articles/s41561-024-01626-8,Geological records indicate that the surface of ancient Mars harboured substantial volumes of liquid water, a resource gradually diminished by processes such as the chemical alteration of crustal materials by hydration and atmospheric escape. However, how a relatively warm climate existed on early Mars to support liquid water under a fainter young Sun is debated. Greenhouse gases such as H<sub>2</sub> in a CO<sub>2</sub>-rich atmosphere could have contributed to warming through collision-induced absorption, but whether sufficient H<sub>2</sub> was available to sustain warming remains unclear. Here we use a combined climate and photochemical model to simulate how atmospheric chemistry on early Mars responded to water–rock reactions and climate variations, as constrained by existing observations. We find that H<sub>2</sub> outgassing from crustal hydration and oxidation, supplemented by transient volcanic activity, could have generated sufficient H<sub>2</sub> fluxes to transiently foster warm, humid climates. We estimate that Mars experienced episodic warm periods of an integrated duration of ~40 million years, with each event lasting ≥10<sup>5</sup> years, consistent with the formation timescale of valley networks. Declining atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> via surface oxidant sinks or variations in the planet’s axial tilt could have led to abrupt shifts in the planet’s redox state and transition to a CO-dominated atmosphere and cold climate.
Hydroclimatic extremes threaten groundwater quality and stability,Simon A. Schroeter; Alice May Orme; Katharina Lehmann; Robert Lehmann; Narendrakumar M. Chaudhari; Kirsten Küsel; He Wang; Anke Hildebrandt; Kai Uwe Totsche; Susan Trumbore; Gerd Gleixner,https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-025-55890-2,Heavy precipitation, drought, and other hydroclimatic extremes occur more frequently than in the past climate reference period (1961–1990). Given their strong effect on groundwater recharge dynamics, these phenomena increase the vulnerability of groundwater quantity and quality. Over the course of the past decade, we have documented changes in the composition of dissolved organic matter in groundwater. We show that fractions of ingressing surface-derived organic molecules increased significantly as groundwater levels declined, whereas concentrations of dissolved organic carbon remained constant. Molecular composition changeover was accelerated following 2018’s extreme summer drought. These findings demonstrate that hydroclimatic extremes promote rapid transport between surface ecosystems and groundwaters, thereby enabling xenobiotic substances to evade microbial processing, accrue in greater abundance in groundwater, and potentially compromise the safe nature of these potable water sources. Groundwater quality is far more vulnerable to the impact of recent climate anomalies than is currently recognized, and the molecular composition of dissolved organic matter can be used as a comprehensive indicator for groundwater quality deterioration.
Accounting for differences between crops and regions reduces estimates of nitrate leaching from nitrogen-fertilized soils,Yan Wang; Yihong Liu; Longlong Xia; Hiroko Akiyama; Xinli Chen; Ji Chen; Yunying Fang; Tony Vancov; Yongfu Li; YuanZhi Yao; Dianming Wu; Bing Yu; Scott X. Chang; Yanjiang Cai,https://www.nature.com/articles/s43247-025-02001-0,Nitrate (NO<sub>3</sub><sup>−</sup>) leaching from nitrogen (N) fertilized soils is a significant global concern, affecting both the environment and public health. However, substantial uncertainties and variabilities in NO<sub>3</sub><sup>−</sup> leaching factors (LFs) among regions or crops impede accurate assessments of NO<sub>3</sub><sup>−</sup> leaching. Here we synthesize 2500 field observations worldwide and show that LFs vary by an order of magnitude across regions and crops, primarily driven by hydroclimatic and edaphic conditions rather than N fertilizer management. Global cropland NO<sub>3</sub><sup>−</sup> leaching from synthetic N fertilization, calculated through spatially explicit (15.4, 14.8–16.1 Tg N yr<sup>–1</sup>) and crop-specific (12.9, 11.0–14.8 Tg N yr<sup>–1</sup>) LFs, is 41% lower than the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Tier 1 global inventory. Over 47% of this leaching is concentrated in China, India, and the United States, with maize, wheat, rice and vegetables accounting for nearly half of it. Improved regional and crop-specific LFs will provide a benchmark for NO<sub>3</sub><sup>−</sup> leaching abatement by pinpointing potential global hotspots.
Gross primary productivity is more sensitive to accelerated flash droughts,Yangyang Jing; Shuo Wang; Pak Wai Chan; Zong-Liang Yang,https://www.nature.com/articles/s43247-025-02013-w,Flash droughts, characterized by their rapid onset, substantially affect terrestrial ecosystems. However, the sensitivity of ecosystem productivity to the rapid development of flash droughts under varying vegetation conditions remains poorly understood. Here we investigate the ecosystem response to the speed of flash drought onset for different plant functional types, considering the decline rate of root-zone soil moisture and standardized gross primary productivity anomaly. Our findings reveal a significant increase of approximately 10% in the proportion of 1- and 2-pentad (5 and 10 days) onset flash droughts leading to negative standardized gross primary productivity anomalies during 2001–2018. Furthermore, while standardized gross primary productivity anomalies decline at higher rates, they do not promptly respond on a shorter timescale to faster-onset flash droughts compared to slower-onset flash droughts. Vegetation types with shallower root systems exhibit higher sensitivities to faster-onset flash droughts, suggesting an escalating threat to terrestrial ecosystems in a changing climate.
Counteracting greenhouse gas and aerosol influences intensify global water seasonality over the past century,Fubo Zhao; Wenbo Shi; Yiping Wu; Yanqing Lian; Qiang Li,https://www.nature.com/articles/s43247-025-02025-6,Variations in water availability seasonality significantly impact society and ecosystems. While many studies have focused on mean or extreme precipitation, the response of water availability seasonality, influencing yearly water distribution beyond individual extremes, to human-induced climate change remains underexplored. Here we examine global and regional water availability seasonality changes from 1915 to 2014, quantifying how anthropogenic greenhouse gases and aerosols have influenced these variations using reanalysis and simulations from Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6. Despite large spatiotemporal uncertainties due to regional variability and model assumptions, we find that greenhouse gases significantly amplify the seasonality, while aerosols reduce it. Given that the positive effects of greenhouse gases surpass the aerosols’ negative effects, the counterbalancing influences have led to an overall enhancement in seasonality of water availability over the past century. This trend is expected to continue in the future as greenhouse gases-induced warming continues to rise and aerosol levels decline.
